components/eam/docs/user-guide/index.md, before:


# EAM Users's Guide

This Users's Guide describes how to set up and run EAM.

## Table of contents

1. [Steps to build and run EAM](#steps-to-build-and-run-eam)
2. [Scientifically supported compsets and grids](#scientifically-supported-compsets-and-grids)
    1. [Compsets](#compsets)
    2. [Grids](#grids)
3. [Customizing runs](#customizing-runs)
    1. [Namelist changes](#namelist-changes)
    2. [Input datasets](#input-datasets)
    3. [Specifying output (history files)](#specifying-output-history-files)

## Steps to build and run EAM

A step-by-step instruction on how to run E3SM can be found here: https://acme-climate.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/DOC/pages/2309226536

The difference when running in atmosphere-only mode (without an interactive ocean or sea-ice) would be to change the compset and grid. Certain namelist paramters, input data files, and output file specifcations can also be modified. These are described below as ways to customize runs. 

## Scientifically supported compsets and grids

### Compsets

All of the compsets below run with the complete set of E3SM atmospheric configuration of EAMV3. For more information on the schemes in EAMv3, see the techguide.

`F2010` - Climatological present day climate (year 2010)

`F1850` - Climatological pre-industrial-day climate (year 1850)

`F20TR` - Historical EAM simulation with time varying sea-surface temperatures, aerosol emissions, and greenhouse gas forcings (year 1850-2014)

### Grids

<span style="color:red">Need to check final v3 grid to be used for ne30 simulations</span>

`ne30pg2_r05_IcoswISC30E3r5` - ne30pg2 atmosphere, 0.5deg x 0.5deg land grid, and Icosahedral 30 km mesh with ice shelves cavities (wISC), E3SMv3 (E3) revision r5

## Customizing runs

### Namelist changes

Namelist parameters can be specified in the `user_nl_eam` file. While most can be added at run time, some need to be added before `./case.setup` to have the changes applied in the simulation. 

Refer to the individual schemes in the [tech-guide](../tech-guide/index.md) for a list of namelist parameters associated with each scheme in the atmosphere.

### Input datasets

#### Greenhouse gases (non-reacting)

Greenhouse gas concentration inputs of non-reacting species are taken from CMIP6 Forcing Datasets provided from the input4MIPs data collection. In addition to what is provided by the input4MIPS, 2015 and 2016 have been added by extrapolating from 2013 and 2014. 

```
atm/cam/ggas/GHG_CMIP-1-2-0_Annual_Global_0000-2014_c20180105.nc
```

#### Aerosol physical properties

The aerosol properties files provide aerosol refractive index, density, and aerosol hygroscopicty information for each aerosol species, as well as information about lognormal mode definition and lookup tables of polynomial expression coefficients for aerosol optics calculation for each mode. These aerosol physical and chemical properties are used by the radiation, aerosol microphysics and other related source and sink processes, and droplet activation/ice nucleation schemes. Detailed information on the files and related references can be found [here](aerosol_phys_prop.md).

#### Aerosol and gas emission and oxidant files 

Details of the aerosol and gas emission and oxidant files used in various historical, present-day, and future scenario can be found [here](emission_oxidant_files.md).

#### Linoz v3 input files

Linozv3 uses the ozone tendency, (net production minus loss) calculated from its climatological mean state (function of month, latitude, altitude) and a first-order Taylor series expansion about the local ozone, temperature, and overhead ozone column. For historical simulation, Linozv3 uses the linozv3 data files with monthly resolution, spanning the dates 1849-01 -- 2014-12.

##### Historical files

```
 linoz_data_file                = ‘linv3_1849-2101_CMIP6_Hist_10deg_58km_c20231207.nc’
 linoz_data_path                = '/lcrc/group/e3sm/data/inputdata/atm/cam/chem/trop_mozart/ub'
 linoz_data_type                = 'INTERP_MISSING_MONTHS'
```

Refer to [this page](https://acme-climate.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/DOC/pages/3764486280/Production+of+the+Linoz+v3+data) for more details on Linoz v3 input files. 

#### Land

- <span style="color:red">More info on rough topography</span>
- <span style="color:red">More info on land-use land cover change / land surface data</span>

#### Ocean/sea ice

- <span style="color:red">SST file</span>
- <span style="color:red">Sea ice fraction</span>

#### Solar input

As with greenhouse gas emissions, solar input files are taken from the input4MIPs data collection that were prepared for CMIP6 Forcing Datasets.

```
inputdata/atm/cam/solar/Solar_1850-2299_input4MIPS_c20181106.nc
```

### Specifying output (history files)

These are specified in the `user_nl_eam`. 

By default, EAM will output a set of monthly-averaged variables. Additional output files can be specified using the following flags:

`finclX` - List of variables (in single quotes and separated by commas) that are added to tape X.

`fexclX` - List of variables (in single quotes and separated by commas) that will be excluded in tape X.

`nhtfrq` - List of write frequencies for each of the history files. A value of 0 denotes a monthly frequency. Negative values denote hourly frequencies (e.g., `-3` will write an output every 3 hours). Positive values denotes the frequency in model timesteps (e.g., `4` will write an output every 4 timesteps).

`mfilt` - List that sets the number of timesteps to write in a single file before starting a new file.

`avgflag_pertape` - List that sets the type of output to write. Choices are `'A'` for time-averaged output, `'A'` for instantaneous output, `'MIN'` for time-minimum output, and `'MAX'` for time-maximum output. 


#### Example output specification:

```
 nhtfrq = 0,-24,-6,-3
 mfilt  = 1,30,120,24
 avgflag_pertape = 'A','A','A','I'

 fexcl1 = 'U10' # Removes U10 output from monthly files
 fincl2 = 'PS', 'FLUT','PRECT','U200','V200','U850','V850',
          'TCO','SCO','TREFHTMN','TREFHTMX','TREFHT','QREFHT'  # Output files of daily-averaged output, which includes 30 days of output in each file
 fincl3 = 'PS', 'PSL','PRECT','TUQ','TVQ','UBOT','VBOT','TREFHT','FLUT','OMEGA500','TBOT','U850','V850','U200','V200','T200','T500','Z700'  # Output files of 6-hour-averaged output, which includes 30 days of output in each file
 fincl4 = 'PRECT' # Output files of 3-hourly output with 3 days of output in every file
 ```

Commit message:

Add information about the topography file

components/eam/docs/user-guide/index.md, after:


# EAM Users's Guide

This Users's Guide describes how to set up and run EAM.

## Table of contents

1. [Steps to build and run EAM](#steps-to-build-and-run-eam)
2. [Scientifically supported compsets and grids](#scientifically-supported-compsets-and-grids)
    1. [Compsets](#compsets)
    2. [Grids](#grids)
3. [Customizing runs](#customizing-runs)
    1. [Namelist changes](#namelist-changes)
    2. [Input datasets](#input-datasets)
    3. [Specifying output (history files)](#specifying-output-history-files)

## Steps to build and run EAM

A step-by-step instruction on how to run E3SM can be found here: https://acme-climate.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/DOC/pages/2309226536

The difference when running in atmosphere-only mode (without an interactive ocean or sea-ice) would be to change the compset and grid. Certain namelist paramters, input data files, and output file specifcations can also be modified. These are described below as ways to customize runs. 

## Scientifically supported compsets and grids

### Compsets

All of the compsets below run with the complete set of E3SM atmospheric configuration of EAMV3. For more information on the schemes in EAMv3, see the techguide.

`F2010` - Climatological present day climate (year 2010)

`F1850` - Climatological pre-industrial-day climate (year 1850)

`F20TR` - Historical EAM simulation with time varying sea-surface temperatures, aerosol emissions, and greenhouse gas forcings (year 1850-2014)

### Grids

<span style="color:red">Need to check final v3 grid to be used for ne30 simulations</span>

`ne30pg2_r05_IcoswISC30E3r5` - ne30pg2 atmosphere, 0.5deg x 0.5deg land grid, and Icosahedral 30 km mesh with ice shelves cavities (wISC), E3SMv3 (E3) revision r5

## Customizing runs

### Namelist changes

Namelist parameters can be specified in the `user_nl_eam` file. While most can be added at run time, some need to be added before `./case.setup` to have the changes applied in the simulation. 

Refer to the individual schemes in the [tech-guide](../tech-guide/index.md) for a list of namelist parameters associated with each scheme in the atmosphere.

### Input datasets

#### Greenhouse gases (non-reacting)

Greenhouse gas concentration inputs of non-reacting species are taken from CMIP6 Forcing Datasets provided from the input4MIPs data collection. In addition to what is provided by the input4MIPS, 2015 and 2016 have been added by extrapolating from 2013 and 2014. 

```
atm/cam/ggas/GHG_CMIP-1-2-0_Annual_Global_0000-2014_c20180105.nc
```

#### Aerosol physical properties

The aerosol properties files provide aerosol refractive index, density, and aerosol hygroscopicty information for each aerosol species, as well as information about lognormal mode definition and lookup tables of polynomial expression coefficients for aerosol optics calculation for each mode. These aerosol physical and chemical properties are used by the radiation, aerosol microphysics and other related source and sink processes, and droplet activation/ice nucleation schemes. Detailed information on the files and related references can be found [here](aerosol_phys_prop.md).

#### Aerosol and gas emission and oxidant files 

Details of the aerosol and gas emission and oxidant files used in various historical, present-day, and future scenario can be found [here](emission_oxidant_files.md).

#### Linoz v3 input files

Linozv3 uses the ozone tendency, (net production minus loss) calculated from its climatological mean state (function of month, latitude, altitude) and a first-order Taylor series expansion about the local ozone, temperature, and overhead ozone column. For historical simulation, Linozv3 uses the linozv3 data files with monthly resolution, spanning the dates 1849-01 -- 2014-12.

##### Historical files

```
 linoz_data_file                = ‘linv3_1849-2101_CMIP6_Hist_10deg_58km_c20231207.nc’
 linoz_data_path                = '/lcrc/group/e3sm/data/inputdata/atm/cam/chem/trop_mozart/ub'
 linoz_data_type                = 'INTERP_MISSING_MONTHS'
```

Refer to [this page](https://acme-climate.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/DOC/pages/3764486280/Production+of+the+Linoz+v3+data) for more details on Linoz v3 input files. 

#### Topography
The global elevation on the atmosphere grid is a key input dataset.  The dataset is grid dependent. It contains the geopotential data (on both the GLL dynamics and PG2 physics grids) and two surface roughness quantities, `SGH` and `SGH30`.

EAMv3 NE30 data:  
```
/lcrc/group/e3sm/data/inputdata/atm/cam/topo/USGS-gtopo30_ne30np4pg2_x6t-SGH.c20210614.nc'
```

This file is computed via a complex procedure that starts with high resolution dataset (for EAMv3, we use the GTOPO30, a 30 arc-second resolution data set on a lat-lon grid) that is then downsampled to a 3km cubed-sphere grid (cube3000) and then downsampled to the atmosphere  grid on the (GLL nodes), and then smoothed with the same viscosity operator used by the dycore. The smoothed GLL topography is then mapped to the PG2 grid. Finally, two different surface roughness fields are computed:

- `SGH30`: the variance between GTOPO30 and GTOPO30-downsampled-to-PG2 (independent of any dycore specific smoothing).     (used by CLUBB, TMS, vertical_diffusion)
- `SGH`:  the variance between the cube3000 data and the smoothed PG2 data.  (used by GWD parameterizations)

#### Land-use / land cover change

- <span style="color:red">Info needed on land-use land cover change / land surface data</span>

#### Ocean/sea ice

- <span style="color:red">SST file</span>
- <span style="color:red">Sea ice fraction</span>

#### Solar input

As with greenhouse gas emissions, solar input files are taken from the input4MIPs data collection that were prepared for CMIP6 Forcing Datasets.

```
inputdata/atm/cam/solar/Solar_1850-2299_input4MIPS_c20181106.nc
```

### Specifying output (history files)

These are specified in the `user_nl_eam`. 

By default, EAM will output a set of monthly-averaged variables. Additional output files can be specified using the following flags:

`finclX` - List of variables (in single quotes and separated by commas) that are added to tape X.

`fexclX` - List of variables (in single quotes and separated by commas) that will be excluded in tape X.

`nhtfrq` - List of write frequencies for each of the history files. A value of 0 denotes a monthly frequency. Negative values denote hourly frequencies (e.g., `-3` will write an output every 3 hours). Positive values denotes the frequency in model timesteps (e.g., `4` will write an output every 4 timesteps).

`mfilt` - List that sets the number of timesteps to write in a single file before starting a new file.

`avgflag_pertape` - List that sets the type of output to write. Choices are `'A'` for time-averaged output, `'A'` for instantaneous output, `'MIN'` for time-minimum output, and `'MAX'` for time-maximum output. 


#### Example output specification:

```
 nhtfrq = 0,-24,-6,-3
 mfilt  = 1,30,120,24
 avgflag_pertape = 'A','A','A','I'

 fexcl1 = 'U10' # Removes U10 output from monthly files
 fincl2 = 'PS', 'FLUT','PRECT','U200','V200','U850','V850',
          'TCO','SCO','TREFHTMN','TREFHTMX','TREFHT','QREFHT'  # Output files of daily-averaged output, which includes 30 days of output in each file
 fincl3 = 'PS', 'PSL','PRECT','TUQ','TVQ','UBOT','VBOT','TREFHT','FLUT','OMEGA500','TBOT','U850','V850','U200','V200','T200','T500','Z700'  # Output files of 6-hour-averaged output, which includes 30 days of output in each file
 fincl4 = 'PRECT' # Output files of 3-hourly output with 3 days of output in every file
 ```
