components/omega/doc/design/HorzMeshClass.md, before:

(omega-design-horz-mesh)=
# Horizontal Mesh

## 1 Overview

The mesh class will contain the YAKL arrays which describe the horizontal mesh and are used in the computation of the tendency terms in the discrete governing equations. OMEGA will separate the horizontal mesh variables from the vertical mesh information.

## 2 Requirements

### 2.1 Requirement: OMEGA will use the previously established MPAS Mesh Spec

The OMEGA mesh information should be compatible with the [MPAS Mesh Specification](https://mpas-dev.github.io/files/documents/MPAS-MeshSpec.pdf).

### 2.2 Requirement: Functionality is needed to read the mesh on the host and transfer relevant data to the device for computation

Not all mesh information is required in computing the tendency terms on the device, e.g. lonCell, latCell, etc.
However, other arrays will need to be allocated and copied to the device for use in tendency computation.
The mesh class will explicitly include host and device YAKL arrays for each variable.
A class method will be included to copy the relevant mesh information to the device.

### 2.3 Requirement: Zero-based cell, edge, and vertex numbering

Although the existing MPAS Mesh spec uses a one-based mesh numbering, zero-based mesh numbering is required to be compatible with the zero-based indexing used for YAKL arrays.

### 2.4 Requirement: Work with Decomp class to decompose mesh

The mesh class will reference the partitioned connectivity arrays created by the Decomp class.

### 2.5 Requirement: Mesh variables will be associated with metadata to describe data

Following the Metadata and IO designs, the YAKL arrays for the mesh variables will be associated with information about the represented values.

### 2.6 Requirement: I/O to obtain mesh data

The Mesh class will have a method to read in the mesh information not obtained by the Decomp class.

### 2.7 Desired: Ability to support multiple independent mesh objects

This flexibility is required to support future implementations of spatially split barotropic and baroclinic modes that are computed on different resolution meshes.
Additionally, this flexibility can be used to support separate domain decompositions for the barotropic and baroclinic meshes, which can help optimize the communication frequency for the barotropic subcycling via wide barotropic halos.

### 2.8 Desired: OMEGA can read in a reduced number of mesh variables and compute the remaining array information online.

Many of the mesh variables are not independent, e.g.  areaCell, weightsOnEdge, etc., and can be computed from a reduced set of mesh variables.
This functionality could be used to reduce mesh/restart file size for high resolution meshes.
Building in this flexibility would allow for all mesh-related calculations to be available within the code base instead of spreading them amongst various utility programs in MPAS-Tools.
This will improve the ability to maintain and unit test the mesh calculations in MPAS-Tools.
The functions used to compute the dependent mesh information can also be used to verify any mesh information that is provided in the mesh input stream.

As standard practice, all necessary internally computed mesh information will be output in a single file for post-processing purposes.
A checksumming strategy will be implemented to avoid situations where simulation data and mesh information are mismatched during post processing.

Where appropriate, some additional derived quantities (e.g. reciprocals) will also be included to improve the performance of device-side calculations.

## 3 Algorithmic Formulation

The algorithms required for computing dependent mesh quantities are currently implemented in the MPAS Mesh Converter utility.

## 4 Design

### 4.1 Data types and parameters

#### 4.1.1 Parameters

```c++

```

#### 4.1.2 Class/structs/data types
The horizontal mesh information will be organized in a class with public YAKL arrays.
Arrays that require a device copy will have a explicit variable.
Connectivity arrays that are already contained in the Decomp class will be replicated in the horizontal mesh class via pointers.
```c++
class HorzMesh {

public:

  Array1DR8 AreaCell;
  ArrayHost1DR8 AreaCellH;

  Array2DI4 CellsOnCell;
  ArrayHost2DI4 CellsOnCellH;

}
```

### 4.2 Methods

There will be a constructor and destructor for the class with the constructor being responsible for calling several private methods.

#### 4.2.1 Constructor
The constructor will also be responsible for:
  * use Decomp object to create reference to the decomposed connectivity arrays.
  * reading the other local mesh information.
  * computing and dependent mesh quantities.
  * creating device copies of mesh information
  * registering metadata with the I/O infrastructure

```c++
HorzMesh(Decomp decomp);
```

#### 4.2.2 Destructor
A destructor will be available to release memory.

#### 4.2.2 Read
The mesh class requires a method to read in all other available mesh information that has been provided in the mesh file, but has not been initialized by the decomposition. This will be a private method called by the constructor.

#### 4.2.3 Compute
The compute method will be a private method called by the constructor. It will be resonsible for calculating any dependent mesh information that is not provided in the mesh input file.

#### 4.2.4 Device copy creation
This method will be repsonsible for creating the device copies of the required mesh information on the host. It will be a private method called by the constructor.

```c++
AreaCell = AreaCellH.createDeviceCopy()

```

#### 4.2.5 Metadata registration
The metadata associated with each mesh variable will be registred within the I/O infrastructure in a private method called by the constrctor.


## 5 Verification and Testing

### 5.1 Test mesh compute routines

The sample domain used for the Decomp test will be used to test obtaining the correct local values and the mesh computation routines.

Commit message:

Refactor: Migrate Omega from YAKL to Kokkos
* The Omega build system builds and links with Kokkos.
* Several Kokkos functions are wrapped in the Omega namespace.
* Previous YAKL codes in Omega modules have been translated to Kokkos.
* All unit tests have also been translated to Kokkos.
* The translation has been tested on Frontier GPU (HIP)/CPU (OpenMP), on Perlmutter GPU (CUDA)/CPU (OpenMP), and on Chrysalis CPU (OpenMP).
* On CPUs, the default parallelization is set to OpenMP.

components/omega/doc/design/HorzMeshClass.md, after:

(omega-design-horz-mesh)=
# Horizontal Mesh

## 1 Overview

The mesh class will contain the Kokkos arrays which describe the horizontal mesh and are used in the computation of the tendency terms in the discrete governing equations. OMEGA will separate the horizontal mesh variables from the vertical mesh information.

## 2 Requirements

### 2.1 Requirement: OMEGA will use the previously established MPAS Mesh Spec

The OMEGA mesh information should be compatible with the [MPAS Mesh Specification](https://mpas-dev.github.io/files/documents/MPAS-MeshSpec.pdf).

### 2.2 Requirement: Functionality is needed to read the mesh on the host and transfer relevant data to the device for computation

Not all mesh information is required in computing the tendency terms on the device, e.g. lonCell, latCell, etc.
However, other arrays will need to be allocated and copied to the device for use in tendency computation.
The mesh class will explicitly include host and device Kokkos arrays for each variable.
A class method will be included to copy the relevant mesh information to the device.

### 2.3 Requirement: Zero-based cell, edge, and vertex numbering

Although the existing MPAS Mesh spec uses a one-based mesh numbering, zero-based mesh numbering is required to be compatible with the zero-based indexing used for Kokkos arrays.

### 2.4 Requirement: Work with Decomp class to decompose mesh

The mesh class will reference the partitioned connectivity arrays created by the Decomp class.

### 2.5 Requirement: Mesh variables will be associated with metadata to describe data

Following the Metadata and IO designs, the Kokkos arrays for the mesh variables will be associated with information about the represented values.

### 2.6 Requirement: I/O to obtain mesh data

The Mesh class will have a method to read in the mesh information not obtained by the Decomp class.

### 2.7 Desired: Ability to support multiple independent mesh objects

This flexibility is required to support future implementations of spatially split barotropic and baroclinic modes that are computed on different resolution meshes.
Additionally, this flexibility can be used to support separate domain decompositions for the barotropic and baroclinic meshes, which can help optimize the communication frequency for the barotropic subcycling via wide barotropic halos.

### 2.8 Desired: OMEGA can read in a reduced number of mesh variables and compute the remaining array information online.

Many of the mesh variables are not independent, e.g.  areaCell, weightsOnEdge, etc., and can be computed from a reduced set of mesh variables.
This functionality could be used to reduce mesh/restart file size for high resolution meshes.
Building in this flexibility would allow for all mesh-related calculations to be available within the code base instead of spreading them amongst various utility programs in MPAS-Tools.
This will improve the ability to maintain and unit test the mesh calculations in MPAS-Tools.
The functions used to compute the dependent mesh information can also be used to verify any mesh information that is provided in the mesh input stream.

As standard practice, all necessary internally computed mesh information will be output in a single file for post-processing purposes.
A checksumming strategy will be implemented to avoid situations where simulation data and mesh information are mismatched during post processing.

Where appropriate, some additional derived quantities (e.g. reciprocals) will also be included to improve the performance of device-side calculations.

## 3 Algorithmic Formulation

The algorithms required for computing dependent mesh quantities are currently implemented in the MPAS Mesh Converter utility.

## 4 Design

### 4.1 Data types and parameters

#### 4.1.1 Parameters

```c++

```

#### 4.1.2 Class/structs/data types
The horizontal mesh information will be organized in a class with public Kokkos arrays.
Arrays that require a device copy will have a explicit variable.
Connectivity arrays that are already contained in the Decomp class will be replicated in the horizontal mesh class via pointers.
```c++
class HorzMesh {

public:

  Array1DR8 AreaCell;
  HostArray1DR8 AreaCellH;

  Array2DI4 CellsOnCell;
  HostArray2DI4 CellsOnCellH;

}
```

### 4.2 Methods

There will be a constructor and destructor for the class with the constructor being responsible for calling several private methods.

#### 4.2.1 Constructor
The constructor will also be responsible for:
  * use Decomp object to create reference to the decomposed connectivity arrays.
  * reading the other local mesh information.
  * computing and dependent mesh quantities.
  * creating device copies of mesh information
  * registering metadata with the I/O infrastructure

```c++
HorzMesh(Decomp decomp);
```

#### 4.2.2 Destructor
A destructor will be available to release memory.

#### 4.2.2 Read
The mesh class requires a method to read in all other available mesh information that has been provided in the mesh file, but has not been initialized by the decomposition. This will be a private method called by the constructor.

#### 4.2.3 Compute
The compute method will be a private method called by the constructor. It will be resonsible for calculating any dependent mesh information that is not provided in the mesh input file.

#### 4.2.4 Device copy creation
This method will be repsonsible for creating the device copies of the required mesh information on the host. It will be a private method called by the constructor.

```c++
AreaCell = OMEGA::createDeviceCopy(AreaCellH)

```

#### 4.2.5 Metadata registration
The metadata associated with each mesh variable will be registred within the I/O infrastructure in a private method called by the constrctor.


## 5 Verification and Testing

### 5.1 Test mesh compute routines

The sample domain used for the Decomp test will be used to test obtaining the correct local values and the mesh computation routines.
