components/omega/doc/devGuide/Docs.md, before:

(omega-dev-docs)=

# Documentation

The OMEGA documentation is generated using the
[Sphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/) package and is written in
[MyST](https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/latest/syntax/syntax.html)
format.  We recommend these
[basic tips](https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/latest/syntax/roles-and-directives.html#roles-directives)
on using MyST in Sphinx.

Another easy way to get started is by taking a look at the existing source
code for the documentation:

<https://github.com/E3SM-Project/Omega/tree/develop/components/omega/doc>

Each time you add new features to OMEGA, the corresponding documentation must
be included with the pull request to add the code.  This includes documentation
for both the User's Guide and the Developer's Guide. We will add some examples
as the documentation gets fleshed out.

Please add anchors for internal linking to the top of every page before
headings within the page whenever you think internal linking might be useful
(now or in the future).  In the User's Guide, please start each anchor with
`omega-`:

```markdown
(omega-quick-start)=

# Quick Start for Users
...
```

This is in anticipation of a future time when the OMEGA documentation might
be combined with other components of E3SM.

In the Developer's Guide, anchors should start with `omega-dev-`:

```markdown
(omega-dev-quick-start)=

# Quick Start for Developers
...
```

Documentation for an OMEGA feature in the User's Guide should contain
information that is needed for users who set up and run OMEGA, including:

- Background information on the feature (though not as much as in Developer's
  Guide and not referencing code) that gives the user an understanding of
  the configurable parameters.
- Config options related to the feature that users can modify in a YAML file.
- Flags related to the feature that a user can (or must) set when building
  OMEGA.

The Developer's Guide should also serve as a reference manual.  Among other
things, the documentation in the Developer's Guide needs to provide an easy way
for other developers or reviewers to verify the code against the intended
implementation. Therefore, documentation for a new feature in the Developer's
Guide should:

- Describe the actual mathematical terms (or a reference to them).
- Describe the discretized form with variables close to what are used in the
  code.
- Provide details on unit tests that cover that feature, if applicable.
- Describe any polaris regression tests that cover that feature, if applicable.

Commit message:

Change "OMEGA" to "Omega" in docs

components/omega/doc/devGuide/Docs.md, after:

(omega-dev-docs)=

# Documentation

The Omega documentation is generated using the
[Sphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/) package and is written in
[MyST](https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/latest/syntax/syntax.html)
format.  We recommend these
[basic tips](https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/latest/syntax/roles-and-directives.html#roles-directives)
on using MyST in Sphinx.

Another easy way to get started is by taking a look at the existing source
code for the documentation:

<https://github.com/E3SM-Project/Omega/tree/develop/components/omega/doc>

Each time you add new features to Omega, the corresponding documentation must
be included with the pull request to add the code.  This includes documentation
for both the User's Guide and the Developer's Guide. We will add some examples
as the documentation gets fleshed out.

Please add anchors for internal linking to the top of every page before
headings within the page whenever you think internal linking might be useful
(now or in the future).  In the User's Guide, please start each anchor with
`omega-`:

```markdown
(omega-quick-start)=

# Quick Start for Users
...
```

This is in anticipation of a future time when the Omega documentation might
be combined with other components of E3SM.

In the Developer's Guide, anchors should start with `omega-dev-`:

```markdown
(omega-dev-quick-start)=

# Quick Start for Developers
...
```

Documentation for an Omega feature in the User's Guide should contain
information that is needed for users who set up and run Omega, including:

- Background information on the feature (though not as much as in Developer's
  Guide and not referencing code) that gives the user an understanding of
  the configurable parameters.
- Config options related to the feature that users can modify in a YAML file.
- Flags related to the feature that a user can (or must) set when building
  Omega.

The Developer's Guide should also serve as a reference manual.  Among other
things, the documentation in the Developer's Guide needs to provide an easy way
for other developers or reviewers to verify the code against the intended
implementation. Therefore, documentation for a new feature in the Developer's
Guide should:

- Describe the actual mathematical terms (or a reference to them).
- Describe the discretized form with variables close to what are used in the
  code.
- Provide details on unit tests that cover that feature, if applicable.
- Describe any polaris regression tests that cover that feature, if applicable.
